The tapes are on. Okay, so you wrote the Essex book. So yeah, could you kind of
give us a general history of those, and then I'll hit on the specifics that you
don't cover. Well, in the first place, I'd moved from Syracuse, New York, to Los
Angeles District in 1965.
And at that time, I was working as a tech writer for the space defense industry.
And of course, I was writing on the side. I built up a good backlog of science
fiction novels and short stories. But I hadn't become a full-time writer. Well,
in 1969, a month before the first moon landing, NASA had its funds cut way back,
and thousands of people working in the space industry were laid off, including
myself. So I couldn't get a job there for a while, and finally I got one, and I
said, I want to go into full-time writing, and I did. Well, shortly thereafter,
though I had a lot of money coming in from my book publishers, I couldn't get it
out of them. I guess they were going through one of those slumps where they were
reluctant to let loose funds, and I needed some money. Well, at that time, I was
approached by a fellow named Brian Kirby, who was a science fiction fan, but he
also was an editor for a pornographic book publishing outfit, I think called
American Art Agency. And he was starting a new line called Essex House. Although
Brian had been an editor for some time in the porno field, he was pretty much
disgusted with the books because, one, the writing level was very low, and there
wasn't any characterization or plot or motivation, and very little imagination.
And he wanted to raise the literary level of the porno books, I mean, at least
the ones in the new line Essex House. He also loved science fiction, so he
approached a number of science fiction authors, and asked them if they'd be
interested. At that time, 1969, I'd never even read one of those books, unless
you count Henry Miller as a porno writer, and I don't. And I said, yeah, I'm a
writer, I'd like to try anything. I'll even write romances if I have to.
So he said there would be no taboos or guidelines. Normally, in the porno books,
they have guidelines, and that you have to have a sex scene every four or five,
six pages. He said you can write it exactly the way you want to. So I decided
that I would write a satirical pastiche on my two heroes, one Tarzan and one the
Hero of Pope magazine series, which started in the 30s, called Doc Savage. Doc
Savage is pretty well known even now, because Bantam started reprinting his
books in 1965. So I wrote that, and I had a lot of fun with it. And it went out
where, I didn't know. And then I wrote a book called The Image of the Beast,
which was sort of a satire on gothics and also on private eye novels, and
incidentally, it was a satire on porno books, too.
So that went out, and then I wrote a sequel called Blown, a sequel to The Image
of the Beast. And about that time, I got kind of tired. I guess even if you have
a vivid imagination, there's only so much that you can do with books that are
basically sexual situations. And though I gave it my best, I had
characterization and humor and plot and motivation and all that, I got tired of
it, so I ceased writing for them. And about that time, my publishers started
coming through with all the money they'd owed me anyway. Now, what happened was
that the people who ran the American Art Agency knew nothing whatsoever about
science fiction. And all they knew was porno books. So they made the very bad
mistake of sending all these science fiction books, which I and some other
science fiction readers had written, to the porno bookshops, not to the
general bookstores. And as a result, they didn't sell well, because the usual
porno customer wasn't interested in them. And by the time that the science
fiction people heard that these books were available, the American Art Agency
had already decided to cancel Ethics House. It wasn't a financial go for them,
but it was their own fault. Well, I don't know how many of these three books
that I wrote were printed. I do know that at one time I was told there were
hundreds or maybe even thousands in a warehouse in Los Angeles. But I've never
been able to find out if they're still there or what, because the American Art
Agency closed up a couple of years ago. And I've had no success in getting a
hold of the person who's handling the estate. Is that enough, or do you want to
ask me questions? No, that sounds good. Does it surprise you that the books are
now considered to be top-end collector's items in command? Oh, I've seen them
anywhere from $75 to $150 a piece. Did that ever enter your mind? Well, it never
entered my mind at the time I wrote them. If I had, I would have kept the copies
that Brian Kirby gave me. As it was, I just passed them out to friends here and
there. And as a result, I only have about one or two samples of each of them. If
I'd known what was going to happen, I would have purchased three or four boxfuls
myself. When word got around, of course, collectors being what they are, they
look for rare and unusual books, and they had difficulty finding them. So, of
course, the price went up right away, and it's been going up steadily since
then. Another aspect of that was that after the American Art Agency folded, I
got my rights back to the books, and then I tried to sell them to a national
publisher. But I didn't have any success for ten years. Nobody would touch them.
And then finally, Playboy Press decided to publish them, and Granada in England
decided that they would do it. Also another publisher, I forget their name. The
English publishers were taking a chance because they were afraid they would be
bought to court as it happened. They got by okay. And now, of course, why the
books are, in comparison with other books dealing with sex, they're not, well, I
wouldn't exactly call them innocuous, but their
far-ranging sexual ideas are not so much, they can't be accepted now. Back in 69
and 70, when I wrote them, my national publisher is just afraid to pick a chance
with them. I always thought that the Doc Caliban character on the front of A
Feast Unknown looked kind of like you. The hair and the general facial features,
is that just coincidence? Well, it probably is, unless Brian Kirby described me
to the artist, which he could have done. I never thought about it told truth.
It's kind of a last gasp there. Now, you wrote, Lord of the Trees and the Mad
Goblin are clean sequels to A Feast Unknown. And did you just kind of do those
to, or just to keep up with the fun, the pastiche type writing? Yeah, that was
the main thing. The thing was, of course, in the Feast Unknown, my two heroes,
Doc Caliban and Lord Gribardsun,
were engaged in eliminating this ancient evil Council of Nine. And they'd only
knocked off a few in the first book, so I wanted to continue their adventures,
which I did in the Mad Goblin and the Lord of the Trees. And they succeeded in
eliminating a few more of the Council of Nine. However, there are still some
left, so I plan on writing at least one sequel to those and finishing up the
job. Although I don't know when I'm going to do it. You know, actually, I have
about 15 theories going, none of which I've ever finished. Well, when I was
young and went to a psychologist while I was attending the University of
Missouri, he commented that I had terrible difficulty in finishing anything.
So we'll look forward to seeing some more of those then. Well, I hope so. I had
a lot of fun writing them. And I didn't continue the sexual theme in them. In
the first place, I think I exhausted them in the first two books. In the second
place, it's difficult to get publishers to accept them if you do have that theme
there. A less obvious sequel to me was Traitor to the Living as a sequel to
Blown. It seems like it was a little more subtle there that that might be a
sequel. Is it a sequel? Can it be considered a sequel? Oh, yeah, it's a sequel.
I think some of the readers weren't aware of it at the time. Actually, that's
why it opened for another sequel, too, you know. Good. I enjoyed it.
Okay, what about Love Song, then? That was Brandon House. Are they connected
with Essex House, or how did that come about? Well, I guess I was... Yeah, okay.
I wrote that about the time I decided I wasn't going to do it anymore, but I
already had a contract. So I wrote it. It was not science fiction. It sounded
like a gothic, but it had a rational explanation at the end. That's even a rarer
book than The Feast Unknown, Image of the Beast, and Blown. So I've noticed.
Very difficult to get a hold of. So, again, I only have one copy. Now, it has
not been reprinted anywhere, has it? No. I wanted to write in to whoever was
handling the estate and get their rights back. Unfortunately, I can't find him.
This wasn't Brian Kirby and Essex House, that Brandon House is something
different? It was... Brandon House was a line that had existed before Essex
House. But when Essex House ceased, then Brian Kirby went back to Brandon House,
which he was with before he started Essex House. And that was done with him.
Although by the time I'd finished the book, if I remember correctly, Brian Kirby
had already left American Art Agency.
If I can ever find the guy that's handling the business, I'll get the rights
back to that and see if this reprinted. But for all I know, he died or he's in
hiding for the police or went to Brazil or something. Okay. While we're still in
the gutter here, in the book by a guy named Lawrence Knapp called the First
Editions of Philip Jose Farmer, he says that you wrote a book called As You
Desire with the pseudonym William Norfolk. Is that true? Yeah, that's true. But
what happened was I wrote that. A friend of mine who's working for another house
came down and I was still still needed still needed money. And I agreed with
with him to write it, but I said I wanted to do it under an nom de plume. So I
sent the manuscript in. I don't remember offhand the name of the house that took
it. And for years I thought that they'd published it, but just had never
bothered to send me a copy. However, I found out in the last couple of years
that they had gone under. And they'd sold all their manuscripts to the American
Art Agency, which also went under. So the original manuscript was in possession
of the American Art Agency in some warehouse up in North Hollywood. So for the
collectors that are going to be reading this, yes, you did write it, but it has
never been released as a book. No. I do have a carbon in the manuscript, but
I've made no effort to send it out. Well, in light of all the meanings and
subtleties to the pseudonyms that you use, is there anything to the nom de plume
William Norfolk? Well, there's usually something symbolic or significant in the
nom de plumes that I take over. But this was the first time I ever did something
under another name, and there wasn't any particular significance attached to
that, except that they said if you had MD after the title, it seemed to attract
more readers. Of course, I didn't say what MD stood for. It could have been
Doctor of Madness. That sounds apropos. Yeah, well, at the time I was thinking
about choosing the pseudonym. I happened to be reading Burke's Courage, and I
was reading about the Duke of Norfolk. Oh, Norfolk, that's a good name. Can you
give us just a very brief outline? Is that a science fiction book or a fantasy
book or just a mainstream book or what? No, it again is a porno-gothic romance,
I'd call it.
It has to do with lesbianism and also spooky houses and ghosts and all that sort
of stuff.
Okay. My manuscript is a real collector's item because I'm the only one that has
it. I haven't gotten any offers for it yet, and I probably wouldn't sell it, but
as years go by, it becomes more valuable. It might make up for all those
collector's items I gave away.
Okay, yeah, maybe you can retire on that since you did. Well, I doubt if I could
retire on it. Okay, what we want to do is change our cassette tape over to the
other side, and then we'll start talking about Oz. Now, what I'm going to do,
Mr. Farmer, is send this to Fred Greenberg in New Jersey, and he's going to
transcribe it, and we're going to use this in his paperback advertiser. If you
would like copies of that, I'd be glad to send you some when it comes out. Oh,
yeah, I would for my bibliography. You bet. There will be several of them. My
address? Pardon me? Do you have my address? Yes, sir, I do. I don't know. I
think it'll probably be one or two months, but I have the four Essex, well, the
three Essex in the branded books, so we took pictures of them, and we'll have
pictures in there just so people can see what they look like. Oh, okay. I was
kind of glad to hear that As You Desire hadn't come out because I don't have it,
and I've got everything else you did in the first edition, so I thought I was
going to have to go looking for it. Well, maybe someday I might rewrite it in
the command that comes out. Okay. I just got through rereading. We're still
rewinding here. I just got through reading the Purple Book. I enjoyed that. I'd
read the New Writers of the Purple Wage, but I hadn't read the others, and I
enjoyed that. Oh, thank you. I had a lot of fun writing The Making of Revelation
Part 1 and also Purple Passage of Rip Van Winkle. Yeah, I would think you would
have enjoyed that. Okay, are we rewound and are we turned over? The tape's
rolling. Okay, the tape's rolling, so we'll start talking about Oz now in light
of your Barnstormer and Oz. Did you read the Oz books when you were a child or
as a young adult? Oh, I started reading them when I was very young. I think
about six or seven years old. Our local library here in Peoria, the Branch
Library, had all the books by Baum, and I loved them and read and reread them.
And then a couple, about two years ago, I joined the International Wizard of Oz
Club, which is composed of people who are devoted to Baum's works, and they put
out a quarterly called the Baum Bugle. I also went out and repurchased all of
Baum's books. I had a collection, but they were destroyed in a flash flood in
Los Angeles while I was there. And then I got all the Oz books by Ruth Plumlee
Thompson, who continued the series after Baum died. And I have books by Oz
books by several other people, Jack Snow, also Neil, who illustrated the Baum
books, wrote a couple. And I'd always had a desire, ever since I was young, to
be a writer, and I'd always wanted to write an Oz book. But I didn't get around
to it until I was 64 years old. Now, of course, the book that I would write when
I'm 64 is quite different from the one that I would write if I were 10 or 11. So
I'm waiting to hear the reaction from the members of the International Wizard of
Oz Club.
Because this, as you know, assumes that only the first Oz book, The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz, is true. And that's all the rest are fiction. And then it
approaches Oz from a science fictional viewpoint. That is, it could have existed
if it did, then you have to explain how a scarecrow could be animated and
sentient and talk. What would happen if animals could talk? How do you account
for the 10 woodman's piecemeal method of being reconstructed out of 10? and
explain magic and explain magic and all that sort of stuff from just where Oz
was. I had a lot of fun doing it, but I also had to do an awful lot of research
because it took place in 1923 and I had to read all about what was happening in
America at that time.
and I've been a World War I and early aviation buff and I have a considerable
library on that, but I still had to look up a lot of things on the Jennings and
on the machine guns and the BARs of that period and army organization, politics,
and all that sort of thing. plus, of course, the agonizing task of being able to
explain in a rational manner just how the land of Oz could exist and how all
these beings could exist in it. Also, there's something you may not have
noticed. There's a character in there called Sharts the Shirtless. Okay. And he
actually is sort of a wild Doc Savage. If you were acquainted with the first Doc
Savage magazine that came out, you would see that his shirt was torn to shreds.
And the, when the 1965 reissues by Bantam came out, the artist, what was his
name? Hmm. I can't remember it right off right hand. But anyway, he continued
that torn shirt motif. So, Sharts, the shirtless, is sort of an Ozziean takeoff
on Doc Savage. Plus the fact that his rare, his companion, the rare beast logo,
is sort of a takeoff on Doc Savage's apish buddy, Monk Mayfair. It doesn't
matter to the reader whether he knows that or not, but if he does know it, it
adds a little extra savor. I didn't catch that. When I read it, I figured there
was something there, but I haven't read everything yet, and one of the things I
have not read is Doc Savage, and so I don't get those subtle points. Well,
that's all right. That's just something I add in case you do happen to know it.
Fine, but Sharts, the shirtless, and the rare beast stand out by themselves as
characters. Anyway, I departed at a 90 degree angle from the original model.
When I make the shows based on this tape, I'm going to put that in because
that's one of the things that makes this fun to find out things like that. I
guess if you hadn't arbitrarily, well, I guess not arbitrarily, but if you
hadn't cut it off after the first volume and said everything thereafter was
fantasy, the task of writing it would have been that much more complicated.
Well, it would have been impossible because Baum's books had so many changes and
contradictions in them later on that it would be impossible to explain. Plus the
fact that if you are writing an original Oz novel, you can do it without getting
permission from people who own the copyright because the first two books have
gone out of copyright. I ascertained that before I thought about or thought
seriously about starting to write on them. I wrote to Riley Company in Chicago
and they told me that if I could go ahead and write an Oz novel, as long as I
did not use any new characters or places
in the later books, that is those that were written after the first two, if they
contained new characters, let's say like the Hungry Tiger, where are we in,
maybe use in a second, well anyway, there were a number of characters like the
Gnome King that I could not have used because they were in the later books. but
the main thing was, of course, obviously, the later books were fiction. I mean,
there were so many contradictions and changes.
Why was Oz so popular? I guess it was almost an instant success and a
continuance, and it still is popular. Why do you think that those books are so
popular? Well,
of course, there were many books written back in 1900 and afterwards about
foreign lands or fairy lands, but what Baum did was to create a magnificent
quest, and what you have Dorothy looking for a way of getting home, the cowardly
lion, wanting courage, tin woodmen running a heart, and a scarecrow running
brain. Now, the thing is, they all thought that the wonderful Wizard of Oz could
give it to them. Well, he told them he would, but he put them through a series
of trials. You know, first they had to go out and kill the wicked witch of the
West, and I forget offhand what the other quest was. But the point was that they
had all these qualities that they wanted.
The scarecrow was ignorant, but he was intelligent, and the tin woodmen had a
very tender heart, even if he didn't have a heart inside that tin body. And the
carly lion was like all of us. He'd get scared, but he was able to overcome his
fear. But they needed some magical reassurance, and finally when they exposed
the Wizard of Oz as a humbug, he still concocted devices, physical devices,
which were symbols of what they wanted. You know, he had the cowardly lion drink
a pot of courage. Somebody had suggested it was probably Dutch courage. And he
made a heart out of velvet
filled with sawdust and put it inside the tin woodman's body.
he stuck, oh, okay. He put bran inside the scarecrow's head, and then he put
needles in them, and he said his head was brand new now, and it was sharp,
needle sharp, of course. Baum was great for fun. And having these physical
evidence of things they wanted, they proceeded to be very happy, although they'd
had these qualities all this time. And I think that moral there, that wonderful
quest that found both for them,
was something that appealed to the hearts of all the kids, and of course adults
too. And then, of course, Dorothy had had the means of getting home all the
time, because when the Wicked Witch of the East was crushed by her house,
dropping out of the cyclone, she put on the silver slippers of the witch, and
wore them all through her adventure, not knowing that all she had to do was wish
to be back in Kansas, and she could go home. It wasn't until Glinda the Good, at
the end of the book, told her that her shoes could do it, that Dorothy realized
that all this time, she could have gone home a few minutes after she got into
odds if she wanted to. In other words, Baum was saying, well, look, look around
you, maybe you have the means for success or escape around you, you don't have
to find some magical means. Although, of course, the silver slippers were
magical. Well, anyway, that's my explanation of the popularity of the book. And,
of course, there are millions who, I suppose, never read the book, who know
about Oz through the movie.
in a barnstormer of eyes, the character that interested me most, it seemed to be
the character you were most into was Glinda the Good or Glinda the Ambiguous.
Yeah. My good. Okay. She was an interesting character. Yeah, well, I sort of
fell in love with Glinda when I was little. and, of course, now being almost 65,
I have sort of an adult viewpoint
of Oz. I can still enjoy it in an almost childlike manner, but now being an
adult, I can see that there are profundities in three dimensions to that. Then
it came to me that perhaps all these adventures that Dorothy had gone through
had been sort of subtly arranged. by Glinda in order to knock off one, the
Witches of the East and two, the Witches of the West and also get rid of the
Wizard, whom she knew was a humbug.
So I became very much interested in her character. And then I thought, hmm,
President Harding died in 1923. Did Glinda have anything to do with that?
Are you going to blame the Depression on her in a sequel maybe? No, I hadn't
thought about that. Oh, that's a good idea. I had somebody else responsible for
it. You know, peace. I kind of like these big paranoiac things anyway, you know,
like one person's potting or making conspiracies overthrow the whole world and
all that. people who have to write that down. When you wrote Barnstormer, what
audience were you aiming for? Science fiction audience. Although, of course,
there are a lot of people who don't read much science fiction who still like Oz.
But primarily, I think I was writing it for myself. I mean, you know, you get
down to the bottom of it. Because I've always loved Oz. Always wanted to write
an Oz book and finally did it. And I might write another one because when I got
to the end, I realized that I really hadn't developed Jenny. He animated the
airplane enough. Plus the fact that Oz is beautiful. There's always more, there
are always more wonders there, you know. I might write one more. maybe four or
five years from now. That was going to be my next question. It seemed that it
didn't end abruptly, but nonetheless, there were a few things that the reader, I
think, would like to know about. So it would be appreciated if you continued it.
Yeah, well, as I said in the afterward, I had planned on Hank Stuber, my hero,
encountering the old and dying Wizard of Oz up in the North Country, you know.
but it just wasn't time enough. I was under a lot of pressure to get the
manuscript in and time. But I could use that in the sequel, for instance,
because I had a pretty interesting scene sketched out in my mind. And there are
a lot of other things. Well, yeah, I'd think of... It's a science fiction book.
I took what Baum had set out and then I tried to extrapolate it, extrapolate
from it, go deeper. A lot of things that Baum, who was writing a fairy tale for
children, just glossed over, which he should have done, because children aren't
interested in great detail. But the background that Baum furnished, and I had to
go ahead and figure out just what kind of society would have existed in us. And,
for instance, the effect of intelligent language-speaking animals, what would
that have on society? Certainly our society would not be much like Earth
society, for instance. Just because of the presence of those animals. Just like
you had almost as if you had extraterrestrial people living among you, with whom
you have to deal, you know, and strike some sort of social balance.
I was also struck by the explanation for the purpose of scarecrows in Oz. That
was a complete switch, right? Scarecrows, instead of being set up to scare away
the crows, were set up there to advertise the fact that there was food growing
there for them. Well, that's the only way it could be. If crows have the
intelligence of human beings and can talk, they're not going to be fooled one
minute by a scarecrow, right? But Dorothy had assumed, because of her short stay
there, that scarecrows were up there for the purpose they were set up for on
Earth. So I figured out otherwise. the other interesting reaction that I had was
when I read the scene in which the pilot of the first mission that tried to make
it through when the pilot was killed, when they buried him and they had this
barbaric funeral ritual. That was kind of interesting as well. Well,
Oz is not a mamby-pamby land. It's real and inhabited by real people, even if
they're very short people.
And if you have people who are descended from the ancient gods who intermingled
with the Neanderthals originally, then you're not going to have a society quite
like the medieval societies of earth. There would be a lot of customs that would
be different.
And like all societies, even Oz society, you know, has its sinister aspects, its
frightening aspects, its alien aspects.
So I'll go into more depth on that in the sequel, or possibly when I write that
quaddling translation of The Wizard of Oz, I might go into that in the forward.
Have you gotten any feedback from either Fred Meyer or the people in the
International Wizard of Oz fan club, or just any Oz fans in general? Yeah, I got
a letter from a Nick Korolenko, who apparently has done some movie work too. And
he even wrote a documentary on Oz once, which Disney didn't take because they
said they wanted to take a different direction. But he still has hopes of
producing it someday. And he loved it. And as a matter of fact, he's going to
call me up for a second for an interview, it should be printed in the Bound
Bugle, I believe. Oh, good. Okay. It'll be accompanying a review of the book.
Okay. Fred Meyer sent me a copy of the Bound Bugle, which I had not seen before.
And it had all sorts of things about the history of Oz as a stage play and that
sort of thing. It was really interesting. I didn't realize it had that much
background. Oh, yeah. The Wizard of Oz Club takes a very scholarly approach to
everything. And they've really gone into all of Baum's works in great depth.
I'm not really an I guess I am kind of a fan. I never would have read it except
I have a daughter who's now five. And I guess I'm in volume 10. I'm reading her
a chapter a night. And so I was, I of course had seen the movie. But I really
enjoyed A Barnstormer because I had read the first one and I could understand
why you chose not to go into the rest of it and treated them as fantasy because
of all the things. But it's really enjoyable to see it, to read it myself and
then to see it through her eyes because she obviously sees it on a different
level. Yeah, well, I'm glad you're doing that. I'm starting off my granddaughter
on the Oz books. And I hope that she'll have the same enthusiasm that I had for
her. The only thing I do, sometimes the English gets a bit antiquated, so I
maybe modernize it just a little bit just so she'll know what the guy's really
doing. Well, I can understand that. She's five. He's climbing the stairs. He's
not ascending the whatever. Five-year-olds don't quite get all the flowery
language sometimes. Yeah, but later on when she starts reading herself, you
know, she'll be able to tackle it without any difficulties. Mr. Farmer, that's
it. I do appreciate getting to talk to you about this. Well, I'm glad to do it.
Great. I enjoyed meeting you in June in Dallas. I didn't have my copy of Love
Song then, so I'll have to go to a con where you're at one of these days and get
it signed. Well, you could always mail it to me. I can mail it back. Okay, I may
do that. Better insure it, though, and make sure it on. Okay, I'll do that.
Okay, I would appreciate that. I might take you up on that. Yeah. Okay, again,
thanks very much. It's been very enjoyable and look forward to seeing whatever
it is that you put out next. It's always a pleasure to read it. Okay. Take care,
Mr. Farmer. Good night now.